- Who was Jesus?
Is he a historical character?
Who wrote the gospels?
Why are they written in Greek?
Why did they have a pro-Roman
perspective?
Why was the religion
headquartered in Rome?
Those were the mysteries
that I saw about the gospels.
- [Voiceover] The origin
of the Christian religion
has been a subject steep in
mystery for nearly 2,000 years.
(curious music)
Joseph Atwell is one of
the number of scholars
today from all around the world
who are
questioning the historic facts
behind these ancient mysteries.
When examining the actual
history of this era,
many of the answers provided
by the church and Christian
scholars do not hold up
to rigorous scrutiny.
- This is really
important for our culture,
to understand where
Christianity came from.
- [Voiceover] No doubt,
Christians have done
a lot of good
for the world,
but then there are other
Christians,
often the most dogmatic, who
create war...
Hatred, and other harm under
the disguise of religion.
In studying how Christianity
emerged,
many of our scholars
agreed that it was used
as a political tool to
control the masses of the day,
and it is still being used this
way today.
- The problem is that
Christianity has been used
as a tool by government that
uses
the goodness in people against
them.
For example, support for
the wars in the Middle East
has been preached to
evangelical Christians
as a way to speed up the end of
days.
This is just one example
of the way that propaganda
is used to control and
manipulate the populace.
Actually, according to my
study of the ancient text,
the second coming of the
Christ has already occurred.
- [Voiceover] Maybe we
need to expand the possible
answers about how Christianity
originated
and deeper questions need to be
asked.
Maybe we need to examine
what political motives
were behind the formation
of the Christian religion.
- I think it's a requirement
of alert citizens
to know how the gospels were
written,
why they were written, who
produced them,
what was the purpose and back of
all this?
This is good citizenry.
Everyone should be involved in
this.
- [Voiceover] Today, we live
on the brink of an immense
paradigm shift, and this modern
time
is very parallel to the era
in which Christianity emerged.
Studying this ancient era
can give us the perspective
needed for coming up with
solutions to today's problems,
and for helping create a better
world that we envisioned.
(triumphant music)
- And the penny dropped, the
penny dropped
that Jesus as a human being
never existed.
- The presentation of the Jesus
character
it's somewhat of a composite
of many Messianic leaders of the
time.
- Well, it's just that's
back to the drawing board,
and we'll leave aside
all of the assumptions
of Christian history
and let's just look at
the texts afresh and
consider every possibility.
Let's open the whole game up.
- Can you think that
Christianity is really
Paganism by a different name?
Now, it feels completely
obvious.
- Some of us are saying
that this was a sun god
turned into a Jewish man.
- In all of this, we're
dealing with literature.
We're not dealing with history.
So the answer is no, there is no
history
to this character, Jesus.
It's entirely a literary
creation.
- [Voiceover] Some of our
Bible scholars are mavericks,
working outside the restrictions
of
mainstream religious
institutions.
This allows them the freedom
to provide fresh insights
and draw from startling
conclusions about how
Christianity was born.
- I began reading a number
of books on the subject.
This turned into a decade-long
research.
- [Voiceover] For Joseph
Atwill, the key was in
the Dead Sea Scrolls, the
only Jewish literature
ever discovered from the
first century AD or CE,
the time that Jesus would've
been preaching among the Jews.
- The characters in the Dead
Sea Scrolls were militaristic,
and you could see that
this movement wanted
to push the foreigners out of
Israel.
They were fundamentalists,
whereas the characters
in the gospel are different.
They are pacifistic.
They are turning the other
cheek.
They're giving to Caesar what is
Caesar's.
How did a movement like
Christianity
come to exist in a
region that was occupied
by Roman soldiers and had
Jewish zealots within it
that were going to push these
Romans out?
How was that possible?
I began studying the other
two major works of the era:
The New Testament and Wars
of the Jews by Josephus,
a Roman court historian
who described the war
between the Romans and the
Jews in the first century.
While reading these works side
by side,
I noticed an amazing
connection between them.
Certain events from the ministry
of Jesus
seemed to closely parallel
episodes from
the military campaign of
Roman Caesar Titus Flavius,
a campaign which took place 40
years
after Jesus supposedly lived.
My efforts to understand
these connections led me
to an incredible discovery.
Christianity had been
invented by a little known
family of Roman Caesars, the
Flavians.
And they left us documents to
prove it.
- The Flavians are not a
household name,
and yet it's the Flavians who
completely reshaped the Roman
Empire.
In Rome, of course, there's the
Colosseum,
which is understood to be
the best known monument
of the Ancient Roman Empire,
perhaps.
The Coliseum is, in fact,
a Flavian construction
produced during the Flavian
Period.
It's under the Flavians
that both Rabbinic Judaism
and Christianity take shape.
- [Voiceover] Why would the
Flavians
be interested in creating
religion?
Much like today, their era was
marked by
political power struggles,
a bankrupt economy,
religious conflicts and endless
wars.
In the midst of this turmoil,
the Flavians
seized control of the
Roman Empire and ushered in
an immense paradigm shift.
To understand the Flavian's rise
to power,
we need to go back to the reign
of the previous powerful rulers,
the Julio-Claudian Dynasty.
Beginning with Julius
Caesar in the year 49 BCE,
the Julio-Claudians ruled
Rome for over 100 years,
transforming the government
from a Republic into an empire.
This family contained
all the famous Caesars.
Julius, who predated the time of
Jesus,
Augustus who was Caesar at the
time of
Jesus's supposed birth,
Tiberius,
who ruled during Jesus's
supposed death,
followed by the infamous
Caligula.
Then Claudius and ending
the Julio-Claudian dynasty
with Nero, whose reign begins in
54 CE.
- The Julio-Claudians
enjoyed a god-like status.
Until the family degenerated
and began to damage the Roman
Empire.
- [Voiceover] By the time of
Nero,
his famous decadence was
bankrupting the empire,
and the Jews of Judea were
staging a huge rebellion
against their Roman rulers.
- Judea was one of the
many conquered provinces
that made up the Roman Empire.
This region, which was
also known as Palestine,
was controlled by a family that
served as
Rome's tax collector, The
Herods.
- They were a Greco-Arab
family, somewhat possibly
judiais, though only judiais
when it was convenient
to please the subjects
they were given who were
put in power in Palestine
and destroyed the previous
Jewish-ruling family,
the Maccabean family, root and
stump.
- [Voiceover] Besides being
heavily taxed
and ruled by a non-Jewish
family put in power by Rome,
the Jews were further
inflamed by the requirement
that a statue of the Caesar
be placed for worship
in every temple throughout the
empire.
- In the Roman Empire,
you could pretty much have
any god you want, but
legally, you had to submit to
the emperor as a god as well.
You had to at least acknowledge
that
the Roman leader was also a
divine figure.
But the Jews would not have any
of it.
- It's fundamental to Jewish
belief that you shall make
no graven images.
It's one of the commandments and
given a sign by God.
So the Jews never made
representations of God.
- The Jews had a very
different type of religion.
They had a religion which
was much more focused
on the book, and less
focused upon cultic statues.
This presented a real
problems for the Romans.
They tried to install statues of
Caesar,
but the Jews weren't
going to buy that at all.
In fact, it aggravated them.
It enraged them, and
the Romans really are,
I think, didn't understand this.
It's not statues.
It's books.
- [Voiceover] And those books
contained what are known
as the Jewish Messianic
prophecies.
- The thing that most moved the
Jews'
revolt against Rome
was an obscure prophecy
from among their writings
that a world ruler
would come out of Palestine.
- Holy books inspired the Jews
to expect
a redeemer who would redeem
Israel, rescue Israel,
restore Israel to power and
leadership in the world.
- The messiah that the
literature described
was a
warrior.
The messiahs would have
claimed the same attributes
the same attributes that David
did.
David could overcome any army
because
God gave him the power to do it.
If you had the power of God,
you could easily defeat the
Roman army.
The people rebelled against Rome
and were led by a Messianic
movement that
had a series of messiahs
that had come forward
to fight against the Roman
Empire.
- [Voiceover] The Hebrew word
Messiah
is translated into Greek
as Kristos, or Christ.
So the title of Christ can
describe any
of the numerous messiahs of this
movement.
- Yes, the word Christ or
Christians
can refer to the Palestine
Messianic movement,
but it's a later term,
it's a later reformulation
of the Messianic movement of
Palestine.
- [Joseph] This movement
rebels against Rome
in 66 and is successful.
It actually defeats them
militarily.
So it must've been a huge
movement.
The victorious Jews set up a
nation state
directly in the Roman Empire.
- And the Romans had to
do something about it.
There was a real danger
that this Messianic movement
could not only boil
over into Judea itself,
but could spread to
other Jewish communities
in other parts of the Roman
Empire.
- Rome ruled its colonies
with a rod of iron,
and any resistance was going
to be met with brute force.
- [Voiceover] At this time
during Nero's reign, two of the
finest military men in the
empire with the Flavians:
Vespasian and son Titus.
- [Joseph] Vespasian and
Titus were military men.
They spent a great deal of
their life outside of Rome.
For over a decade, they had
waged war
against the druids in Brittany
and Gaul.
Vespasian and Titus were
successful
in essentially destroying the
druids.
They left behind no historical
record of their existence.
- [Voiceover] And it's
the Flavians who Nero
calls upon when he needs to
suppress the Jew's rebellion in
Judea.
- Nero responded by
asking his best generals,
Vespasians and his son
Titus to go into Judea
with a huge army, 60, 70,000
troops,
and a similar number of
supporting individuals.
So they meant business.
The Romans came down
to crush the rebellion.
- [Voiceover] In the
year 66 CE, the Flavians
begin their military
campaign against the Jews.
They start further north in
Galilee,
where the first of three
key events takes place.
They destroy the Jewish town of
Galilee.
They also captured a Jewish
rebel,
who later becomes a critical
figure
in the formulation of
Christianity.
- This is where they
captured one of the leaders
of the rebellion, a Jew
named Josephus Bar Mathias.
Now Josephus presented himself
to the Flavians as a prophet.
- He survived.
He survived apparently
by telling Vespasian
that the prophecies of
the Jews pointed out
that Vespasian would become
emperor, and of course he did,
so Vespasian quite liked
Josephus.
He used him as a translator
in his entourage.
He used him to appeal to
the rebels to surrender.
- At this point, Josephus
became a turncoat,
and worked with the Flavians
against the rebellion.
- [Voiceover] Meanwhile, chaos
is increasing back in Rome,
where Nero's rule is being
threatened.
- In the year 68, the
senate found the courage
to depose Nero and he committed
suicide.
Now in that circumstance,
Vespasian was
a prime candidate to become
emperor.
- [Joseph] In the middle of this
war,
Vespasian returned to Rome
and seized the throne.
The Flavians then became
the imperial family.
- [Voiceover] With
Vespasian becoming the new
Caesar in Rome, Titus stays
behind on the battlefield
and sets his sights on
Jerusalem,
where the other two key events
take place.
Titus encircles Jerusalem
at the wall, and finally,
he razes the temple leaving
not one stone atop another.
- It took a while.
They eventually had to bring on
starvation
by building a wall, a barricade
entirely
enveloped in the city.
- What happens, of course, is
the temple,
in 70, is completely destroyed.
- For the Jews, it was
the ultimate calamity
because, of course, this
was the house of their god,
and it was destroyed by the
Romans quite thoroughly.
Titus, of course, was the
victor of this great siege.
Titus carried the spoils
of this captured city
back to Rome for his triumph.
He took the treasures of the
temple,
their famous seven branch
candlestick.
You could see it on the
Arch of Titus in Rome.
It celebrates that tremendous
victory
of Rome, again, triumphant
and Titus, of course,
is the hero of the day.
(triumphant music)
- All of the artifacts from the
temple
that they seized, they
put on public display
in what to they refer to
as the Palace of Peace,
except for one item, the Jewish
scripture.
Josephus records that the
Flavians took
and placed in their private
palace,
where no one was allowed to see
it.
- [Voiceover] Although Titus
Flavius
successfully ended the rebellion
in Judea,
another rebellion soon broke
out in Alexandria, Egypt.
The Flavians were clear
that this was not the end
of the Jewish Messianic
movement.
They also recognized that
it was the Jews' Messianic
literature that was fueling this
movement.
So once they captured
the Jewish scripture,
they had all other copies of it
destroyed.
- [Joseph] And that's
why the Dead Sea Scrolls
had to have been buried
in a cave because that was
the only way it could be safe
from the Roman destruction.
There was not a single scrap of
literature
found from the Messianic
movement
until the scrolls were
discovered.
That's why they're such a
treasure because
they're the only real voice
of the Messianic movement that
we have.
- [Voiceover] And the real
voice of the Jew's Messianic
movement, according to our
scholars,
was violent and militaristic,
not the pacifistic version
depicted in the gospels.
- War against Rome was a
Messianic war.
So that's why I say that
the scrolls are not only
the literature of the Messianic
movement in Palestine,
they're also the literature
of the war against Rome.
- [Voiceover] The Romans needed
to
subdue the Jes' religion.
So they set about influencing
it and changing it.
- They realized they can't
destroy
the Jewish religion altogether.
That's not their objective.
They realized, they're
sensible enough to realize
that they can't do that.
So what you have to do is try
to create a type of Judaism
that is benign and it's
exactly coinciding with the
rise of the Flavian dynasty is
the arrival
of two benign forms of Jewish
ideology.
- [Voiceover] It's during this
period that a new literature
enters history which
describes a peace-loving,
turn the other cheek preaching
Jewish messiah named Jesus
Christ.
But if the Flavians wrote the
gospels,
how could a Roman family know
how to write
Jewish literature that
refers to Jewish prophecy?
The answer lies in the
Flavian's collaborations
with a number of Jewish
intellectuals,
beginning with their own
court historian Josephus.
- Josephus arrives back
in Rome with Titus.
He becomes an adopted member
of the Flavian family,
an amazing turn of events
for the Jewish turncoat.
He becomes Flavius Josephus.
Josephus, at this time,
begins writing the history
of the war, and he records
that Titus gave him
the Jewish scripture.
Josephus's histories has
always been associated
with the origins of
Christianity.
- Time and again you could find
parallels
between what Josephus writes
and what turns up in the
Gospels.
It's a powerful evidence
of their true origin.
- [Voiceover] In reading
the works of Josephus
side-by-side with the
gospels, scholars have noticed
parallels between the two works.
It appears as though
the history of Josephus
records events that
fulfill the prophecies of
the Old and New Testaments.
Early Christians
understood this connection.
In fact, when the Bible
first began to be printed
in the Middle Ages, it included
the history of Josephus.
- He was employed to write
the official history that we
have.
The other histories from this
period
have been destroyed
ruthlessly by the Romans.
Josephus tells us this
in very chilling passages
how the Romans exerted complete
control
of the literature of this
period.
There were alternative
histories of the Jewish war
written while the Romans
rounded up the writers
of those histories and executed
them.
They rounded up all the copies
of those histories and destroyed
them.
That is to say they ruthlessly
wiped out
any alternative history so
that the only history we have
is written by Josephus, and
let's remember who Josephus was.
- Chief propagandist
of the Flavian dynasty.
He was very, very successful.
He moved back to Rome.
He was given an apartment in
the emperor's own townhouse,
and he was appointed
the Chronicler
of the Roman
Jewish War
using Vespasian's own
diaries of the events.
- [Voiceover] Also in
the pages of his history,
Josephus declares that the Jew's
messiah
or Christ is none other than
Flavius Vespasian and his
dynastic family.
- To put it succinctly, Josephus
says that
there was a prophecy that a
world ruler
would come out of Palestine.
The Jews thought this
applied to one of their own.
They were wrong in their
interpretation.
He uses the most cynical
He applied it to the rise
of the Roman Emperor in
Palestine.
- Josephus recorded that
the Messianic prophecies
foresaw not a Jew, but
Vespasian and his dynasty.
In fact, all of the
Flavian historians recorded
that the Flavian Caesar was the
Christ.
- [Voiceover] It was
important to the Flavians
that they be seen as the Christ,
asdivine
and god-like and this was not
mere vanity.
The Julio-Cladians before them
had already
established that presenting
themselves as Gods
was a powerful tool in
controlling their subjects.
When the Flavians took over the
throne,
they inherited an enormous
bureaucracy
that was already in
place, the Imperial Cult,
which was dedicated to promoting
the idea
of Caesar as a god.
- Another part of the puzzle
is the Roman Imperial Cult.
Why is it important?
Well, because it coincides
with that same period of time
as the emergence of the Christ
cult.
- You had a whole social
community,
the whole social structure of
these conquered territories
was governed by the Imperial
Cult and
if you wanted to succeed,
the key social community
to drive was the Imperial Cult
because
that's where all the
movements and shakers were.
- This idea of the emperor
becoming an object of worship
was well-established in the
Roman system
before Vespasian and Titus came
along.
It was prevalent in all major
centers.
It had its own priesthood.
There was a ceremony,
an annual celebration,
annual games for the Imperial
Cult.
Now it had many characteristics
which would later color
the Christian cult.
It grew in the same centers.
It made claims that were
later transferred to Christ.
- The Julio-Claudians had
claimed that they were
of divine descent and that they
were, therefore, legitimate.
Their appeal base was the
Roman aristocracy, the Roman
nobility.
All of that collapsed
into this power vacuum.
Vespesian was declared
emperor by the troops,
by the Roman army.
So effectively, it was a
military coup.
With the change of dynasty,
they have to create
a whole mythology to
legitimize that dynasty.
At the same time they're
creating a whole
mythology to counter Jewish
Messianism.
Somewhere along the line,
those two things get mixed
together.
- When Vespasian died,
Titus began the process
of having his father deified.
This is a complicated process
because
only the Roman senate can
bestow on an individual
the title of Deus or God.
Titus came to the senate
and presented evidence
that the life of his
father had been divine.
Certainly, this would have
included the military campaign
that the Flavians waged through
Judea.
And it's at this time, I think,
that the gospels were written
because the theological
structure
in the gospels of a god, the
father and the son of God
is the same one that Titus would
have been
presenting to the Roman Senate.
Well, the Roman senate did
accept Titus's evidence
and Vespaian was deified and
became a god.
Titus, therefore, became a son
of God.
- [Voiceover] The Arch of
Titus that still stands
in modern Rome today is
inscribed
to the dedication to the Divine
Titus, son
of the Divine Vespasian or Son
of a God.
This Imperial Cult set up
to worship Caesar as God
also provided the basis for the
structure
of the Roman Catholic Church.
- Now the rituals,
paraphernalia and symbols
of Paganism were transferred
wholesale
to the Christian church.
The most obvious and clear
example
is where the title of the
Pagan chief, priest of Rome,
the Pontifex Maximus, became the
title
of the pope, the Christian pope.
If you look at who held
the original bishop
positions in the Catholic
church in those early times,
you will see that they are
members of the same Pagan
aristocracy.
They simply changed their
clothing a little bit.
They wore the same garments,
but they wore slightly
different headdresses.
They had became from being
a priest of a Pagan cult
to being a priest of Rome.
- Where the Vatican now stands,
there was once a Pagan temple,
which celebrated the mysteries
of a dying and resurrecting
God man who wasn't Jesus.
There are many churches in Rome.
I've been to a few where
you go above into the church
and there's Jesus, and
you go underneath and
there's a little sanctuary of
Mithras,
and it's basically the same
figure.
- So the Roman plot to invent
Christianity
is just so clever when you think
about it.
Through the pope, who is
God's representative on Earth,
they no longer needed
expensive standing armies,
wars and punishment of
disobedient peasants.
They could, through religion,
rule their subjects.
- [Voiceover] Over
time, Roman Christianity
propagated over the empire
by way of the mass media
of the day, the Roman roads.
The Romans must have
approved of this new religion
because, as some scholars ask,
"If the gospels really
were Jewish literature
"about a Roman sentenced
criminal,
"why wouldn't they have been
destroyed?"
- One of the really
surprising things for me
was to realize the extent of
Roman control
of propaganda and literature.
So that when you suddenly
get all these Christian
literature arising in this
period,
one has to ask, "Well,
how did that happen?"
The conclusion that one has to
reach
is that that could not have
happened
without some degree of
complicity
on the part of the Romans.
So then one is lead to the
conclusion
that the Romans must be involved
in the production of these
literature.
- [Voiceover] To produce and
disseminate this literature
was a huge under-taking and the
Flavians
undoubtedly had collaborators.
We know they were funded
by the wealthiest family
in the world at this time, the
Alexanders,
a Jewish family who served as
Rome's tax collectors in Egypt.
Like the Herods in Judea, the
Alexanders
had strong motivation to keep
the Jew's Messianic movement
from threatening their
position and their wealth.
One of their family members
was Philo of Alexandria,
a famous Jewish theologian who
was already
writing works that combined
Jewish beliefs
with the modern Greek and
Roman pagan beliefs of the day.
Many scholars agree that his
writings
formed the basis for much of
the philosophy of Christianity.
- In these pages is
practically every concept
that you can find within
Christianity.
He combined Greek philosophy,
and he took that and
combined it with Judaism.
On top of that, he was from
an extremely wealthy family,
and this is important because
you have to
follow the money when you're
looking at
major trends, new paradigms
being set.
And if you look at his family,
then,
you start seeing, "Well,
this is interesting because
"now we're starting to come
across the Flavians again."
His relatives are very
involved with the Flavians.
That whole area is where we
want to look very closely
for the Christian origins.
- It's from exactly the
same circle of people
that you get the first
signs of Christian ideology
and they all lead to the
rise of the Flavian dynasty.
- [Voiceover] Another wealthy
influential character,
Princess Berenice, was from
the Herod family in Judea.
She's the granddaughter of Hera
the Great,
a product of the Herod's
intermarriage
with the conquered Jewish
ruling Messianic lineage.
- Princess Berenice appears
in the New Testament,
which makes her an interesting
character.
She had two or three husbands
and then became the mistress of
Titus.
So you can see this, again,
rather-like dynasty here.
You know, powerful
people, mixed marriages.
You know, checking up with the
conqueror.
Yeah, and it's really where
Joe Atwill takes his idea
of the conspiracy to
write the New Testament.
But let him say it in his own
words.
- Berenice was a Herod related
by marriage
to the Alexanders, and of
course, later,
she became the mistress to
Titus.
The fact that she was so
closely linked with the Flavians
shows you that the three
families were very unified
in financial, romantic and
likely theological issues.
- By the looks of things, this
coalescence
seemed to have brought about a
dynamic
that led to the synthesis
of Judaism and Paganism,
and eventually became
Christianity.
So this is a very key time
period.
- I believe that the gospels
were actually
written under the control of the
Herods,
the Alexanders and the Flavians.
These families
had the motivation
to create
Christianity
and with the expertise in
Judaism that the Alexanders
and the Herods had, they
had the actual technical
ability to come up with these
stories
that were a fulfillment
of Hebraic prophecies.
- [Voiceover] So it seems the
Flavians had
the motivation, the means
and the collaborations
through which they likely
constructed
and began disseminating
Christianity.
And if our scholars are
correct, one of the documents
they left behind are
the gospels themselves.
(curious music)
- I began working on
the study of the Gospels
in the 1970s, and I look at
texts in terms
of how were these composed,
what does understanding
their structure tell
you about who wrote them
and why they were written.
These texts were not
independent Jewish texts,
but they were created
as literary works using
classical literature models.
- If we expect that this is the
testimony
of witnesses, we've got a major
problem.
We actually have four anonymous
documents.
They were not written by the
named people
on those documents.
This is simply church
tradition that the gospels
are so named according to
Mark, according to Matthew.
So this idea that the gospels
are reliable testimony
is patent nonsense.
- Why are the gospels called
gospels?
That's a critical question.
The word gospel in Greek is
Evangelion,
and it means good news
of military victory.
Whose military victory are we
celebrating
here in these gospels?
Well, seems to me that we are
celebrating,
clearly, the Roman
military victory because
these events, the Battle of
Gadara,
the Battle of the later Galilee,
the success at the Battle of
Jerusalem,
these are battles that the
Romans won.
Why are the gospels celebrating
battles that the Jews lost
if these things were written by
the Jews?
- The fact that the gospels
are known to us in Greek
and not in Aramaic or Hebrew, is
I think,
just evidence of their
authorship.
They were not written by
any followers of Jesus,
who would've surely spoken
Aramaic,
and if they had been
fisherman and simple folk,
they would not have
had the literary skills
to write them anyway.
- [Voiceover] If we look
closely,
there actually are clues in the
gospels
that point to who the true
authors were.
- A lot of the Christian
literature advocates
turning away from the Jewish
law and obeying Roman law.
Well this, this fits perfectly
into Roman propaganda purposes.
And then you have, in general,
the portrayal of Jesus
as the peaceful Jew
who is wandering around
in what is depicted as
sort of a pastor or saint,
talking to fisherman and
farmers and so forth,
when in fact, this is a war
zone.
Judea is a war zone, and you ask
yourself,
"Well, why is it not
portrayed as a war zone?"
- I mean, they really had it
down pad
because they had Jesus
saying, "Render unto Caesar
"what is Caesar's", which is
basically
in response to talking about
money.
Whose benefit would that be?
It's so blatantly obvious.
- The perception of Roman
characters
in the gospels, they're all
interpreted
in a favorable light.
They are pro-Roman.
They do not depict the
Romans as the forces of evil.
They reverse that.
It's the Jews who become
the forces of darkness.
It's very striking that various
passages
in the gospels refer to the Jews
as some people separate from
the heroes of Jesus and his
disciples.
The Jews are those who object.
The Jews are those who try
to thwart the divine plan.
Now that gives us a clue,
certainly,
to who were the true authors of
this book.
- They are works of literature
created by
people who are trained
in Jewish literature
but whose values are pro-Roman.
- The Romans wanted to
promote Antisemitism,
and so they bring the story
of the beloved man god,
Jesus Christ, to appear as if
the Jews had brought about his
death.
Because of this, the Jews would
have to
suffer Antisemitism throughout
history.
- So this was a piece of work
that could not have been done
except by fairly
established literary team,
such as the literary team that
was in Rome
actually writing the books of
Josephus.
I mean, that was written
by a literary team,
and it was written as one of the
attempts
to give prominence to the
Flavian Caesars,
which the gospels obviously do.
So it is extremely likely that
the gospels
as a form of epic designed to
magnify
allegorically, the Roman
Caesars,
is also written at the court
of the Flavian emperors.
- [Voiceover] But the Jesus
story takes place many decades
before the Flavians came to
power.
Why would the Flavians create a
work about
a Jewish Messiah that wasn't
even from their own era?
- The gospels were very
precisely backdated 40 years.
Jesus's ministry was started in
30 CE,
exactly 40 years from the
destruction from the temple.
His ministry ends at Passover,
33 CE,
which is 40 years before the
end of the Jewish-Roman War,
which occurred at
Passover in 73 CE with the
famous battle of Masada.
- The gospels are backdated into
the period of Pontius Pilate.
That is to say before
the first Jewish war,
which is to say, in the
Julio-Claudian period.
But this is typical of Flavian
literature.
It's a Flavian technique.
What they do is backdate
the story into the period
of their enemies, namely,
the Julio-Claudians.
And so, generation after
generation of Christian scholars
and even secular historians
go hunting in the
Julio-Claudian period for
the origins of the gospels.
They don't really find any
answers there.
There are allusions in the
gospels
to the destruction of the
temple,
the most reasonable answer
to that is that these
texts were written after the
destruction of the temple.
That is to say in the Flavian
period,
after the change of dynasty.
- [Voiceover] This backdating
of the story of Jesus Christ
40 years earlier from the time
the gospels
may actually have been written
explains
why many of the prophecies
of Jesus came true
within exactly 40 years.
- What does this all add up to?
In my view, the thing that
is the most significant
is the research by Joseph Atwill
in his book Caesar's Messiah,
which suggests that the
gospels were actually
created as works of Roman
propaganda
at the end of the Roman-Jewish
war
under the reign of the Flavian
emperors,
that is Titus Caesar and
Vespasian Caesar.
And if you end up worshiping
Jesus,
what you will really end up
doing
is worshiping Caesar in
disguise.
- [Voiceover] This may
have been how the Flavians
finally got the Jews to
worship Caesar as a god,
by giving them Jesus Christ,
a Messiah more to the Roman's
liking.
But is there any actual
history to this character?
Where did he really come from?
- The mystery, to me,
begins with his very name.
In Greek, Jesus means savior
and Christ means the messiah.
This didn't strike me as
something
you would call a young child.
- These two words are already
important
within Judaism before Jesus
Christ supposedly existed.
Major biblical figures to
a Jewish Greek-speaking
populace would already be called
Christ.
Their ears would already be
acclimated
to accepting this title.
So it isn't just a unique name
of a single person that
just suddenly popped up.
- What did we actually know
abut Jesus Christ the man?
- I don't think that Jesus
can be historically defended.
I don't think there's
any evidence that we can
extend to that particular Jesus.
- So when you actually
set out to investigate
the historical Jesus as
opposed to the Christ of faith,
you very abruptly enter a void.
You find that whereas you might
imagine
the core details of
Jesus are readily known
and accessible, you actually
discover there's no such thing.
- Further, there had never been
any archaeological evidence
of Jesus Christ that had
ever been discovered.
- You cannot find an
established and incontrovertible
biooraphy of Jesus at all.
It doesn't exist.
You enter a strange Twilight
Zone of early Christian belief.
What we have here is not a
movement
that's grown on the accretion
of legends on a real
flesh and blood man, but
instead, the development
of a religious movement
around the idea of a man.
- [Voiceover] There isn't
even an actual physical
description of what Jesus looks
like anywhere in the gospel.
- The presentation of the Jesus
character,
it's somewhat of a composite of
many Messianic leaders of the
time.
Many Messianic leaders of the
time,
most or all of whom came to a
bad end,
usually by crucifixion because
crucifixion
was the Roman punishment
for seditious activity.
- And the penny dropped, the
penny dropped
that Jesus, as a human
being, never existed.
- In all of this, we're
dealing with literature.
We're not dealing with history.
So the answer is, no there is no
history
to this character of Jesus.
It's entirely a literary
creation.
- [Joseph] What the Romans
did was they saw the Jews'
reliance and belief in prophecy.
So they said, "Okay, they want a
prophet.
"Let's give them one."
- [Voiceover] It seems
that in the construction
of the literary character Jesus
Christ,
the Roman authors borrowed
religions concepts
not only from Judaism,
but also from other gods
and religions that they knew.
Some scholars have
noticed the similarities
between the story of Jesus and
the ancient Pagan mysteries.
- In ancient mythology,
we find this whole strain
of thought called Solar
mythology.
Many gods start taking on solar
attributes
because as agricultural
communities
become more important, the
sun becomes the big focus
for the most obvious reason
of planting and harvesting.
The sun is then personified.
So now we have a male sun god.
Becomes a religion in
many parts of the world.
Christianity usurped a
tremendous amount
of sun worship. Some of us
are saying that this was
a sun God turned
into a Jewish man.
This December 25th birthday was,
in fact, the Winter Solstice.
This is really, in fact, the God
of Light.
December 25th actually is the
end
of a three-day period of
when the sun stands still.
The sun appears to be dying
as the days become shorter,
and the sun is reborn at that
point.
- Across the ancient
world, there was this form
of experiential and
philosophical spirituality
in these mystery cults or
mystery schools.
And at the center of these
schools,
you would find a mythos
which was an initiatory myth,
so symbolic myth, which
would help people who were
going through the initiating
process come to the
spiritual awakenings knowledge.
This, they called Gnosis.
And what you see in these
myths is the elements
that would later become the
Jesus story.
- Let's ask the question,
"Is Jesus developed
"from pre-existing literary
characters?"
Jesus has certain episodes
in this so-called life
and each one of them can be
traced
to a prior representation of
that time.
- If you look at the
elements which we found
in the Pagan mystery school
myths,
you find the story of a
dying and resurrecting
son of God whose born of a
virgin,
has 12 disciples, turns
water into wine at a wedding.
He brings a new religion of
love,
is accused of heresy or
provocation by the authorities.
He's put to death,
sometimes by crucifixion.
And then if you want to
commune with the god man,
you take bread and wine and then
you can come to eternal life.
Well, all of this is,
of course, Christianity.
- Easter itself is a long
pre-Christian celebration
of the resurrection of spring
from the death of winter.
- This is an ancient Shamanic
rite
you'll find all over the
world, but you go through a
ritual death where you get
reborn,
but you're reborn as an awake
being.
So you died just to your lower
nature,
and you're woken up to a higher
nature.
(soft flute music)
- You can find them in the Old
Testaments
and the Jewish mythology as
well.
It isn't just Pagan parallels.
I mean the New Testament,
for example, the Ascension.
We have an ascension with
the Old Testament figure
of Elijah, and it's a
very dramatic ascension.
- Elisha, Elijah cycle.
These are two Jewish
prophets, one followed on
from the other which have many
of
the story elements found in
Jesus.
For example, there is a
multiplication of food miracle.
There is a raising of the dead
miracle.
There is a water miracle.
There is an, ultimately, an
ascension to heaven miracle.
Is this fulfillment or is this
simply copying of a useful
theme?
- You can see where they
just used Old Testament
characters and scriptures as a
blueprint
to create this new one.
- A lot of the ethics
of Christianity actually
were around before Christianity.
Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you
is in fact from the Old
Testaments.
So Jesus didn't make that up.
Many of the other aspects
of Christian ethics,
many things which we might like
to applaud
as very good aspects of
Christian ethics
can be found in the
Stoic philosophy in Rome,
which, by the way, is
exactly the philosophical
and ethical school
promoted by the Flavians.
- There's little that
is original about Jesus.
If one separates from his words,
advice that was in the
interest of the Roman Imperial
family, all that you have left
are
snippets of widely known
philosophies,
truisms and concepts that came
directly
from prior Hebraic literature.
- The reason I am now
convinced there's no historical
Jesus, which seems a real, like,
whoa,
to people that are not
familiar with the idea
is a combination of things.
First of all, there's no
evidence for a historical man
which stands up to proper
scrutiny.
Secondly is the story of Jesus
is
full of these motifs which
come from the Pagan mysteries,
and the third reason is because
in the
early Christian movement,
there's these two types
of Christians, certainly
by the second century,
which are, I think of as
Gnostics and Literalists.
What marks out the
Literalists, who will become
the Roman Empire and the
Roman Catholic Church
is that they've got a historical
man.
What marks out the
Gnostics is that they see
it allegorically and their great
heresy
is that Christ didn't come into
flesh.
Now, the winners write history,
and the history books have been
written by the Literalists.
- And all of the tradition about
the
Romans trying to torture
and suppress Christians,
these traditions are correct.
They definitely persecuted the
Messianic
militaristic Christians and they
certainly
would have frowned on the
Gnostic independent thinking
Christians, but the Roman
pacifistic
giving to Caesar what
is Caesar Christians,
that group would have been
promoted.
- Which makes it perfect
for the Roman Empire,
and it's a fascist empire.
It's got a very simple message.
"Just believe this.
"You don't have to transform,
"and you have to go
through the authorities,
"through the bishops, through
the states, ultimately."
It's the perfect thing
for them to pick up,
and that's what they did.
- [Voiceover] Our scholars
agree that the gospels
are complex literary
creations, drawing from both
Pagan and Jewish myth,
but Joseph Atwill goes
a step further to say
that the Flavians wrote
passages directly into
the gospels which show
they were the authors.
- One of the most famous
prophecies that Jesus makes
is about the coming of someone
he refers to as the son of man.
Now many people believe
that he's talking about
a second coming of
himself, and many people
believe this was going to
occur some point in the future.
Well, the fact is, this coming
of Jesus has already occurred.
Jesus makes very specific
prophecies
as to what will happen when
the son of man makes his
visitation.
He refers to three key events:
The Galilean towns will
be crushed, Jerusalem
will be encircled with a wall,
and the temple will be razed,
leaving not one stone atop
another.
He also states exactly when
this individual will come.
He says that the son of
man will appear before
the generation that is alive
and listening to Jesus's
words passes away.
Now to Jews of this era,
a generation is 40 years.
And so the only individual
that could possibly be
the son of man that Jesus
predicts is Titus Flavius.
Titus Flavius did destroy
the Gallilean towns.
He did encircle Jerusalem with a
wall,
and he razed the temple and
left not one stone atop another.
And he did this within 40 years.
Josephus recorded that no
matter how Titus tortured
the Jews, they refused
to call him lord or God.
So to circumvent this
stubbornness,
the Flavians wrote the
gospels in which a son of man
was predicted to come in the
future.
Titus fulfilled these prophecies
and became the son of man.
So you end up worshiping
Titus without knowing it.
- [Voiceover] To further
support his thesis
that the Flavians originated
Christianity,
Joseph Atwill points to
the Roman Catholic Church's
earliest saints known as
the Christian Flavians.
- The Flavian family is
connected to
early Christianity in a
number of unusual ways.
So many members of the
family were recorded
as having been among the
first Roman Catholic saints.
These include Flavia
Domitilla, who is either
Titus's sister or his niece,
and there is an inscription
honoring Flavia for donating
the land that became
the first Christian catacomb,
and Flavia Domitilla
was the first Christian saint.
Her son, Clement, is
recorded as having been
the first Roman Catholic
pope after the apostle Simon.
In addition, there were
two members of the Flavian
household staff, Nereus and
Achilleus.
Both of them had churches named
after them
in the very earliest
Christian Diocese in Rome.
There was a Christian
theologian whose name was
Titus Flavius Clemens,
Clement of Alexandria,
and he's the one who actually
described
the first christian symbols and
he said
they were the anchor, the boat,
the fish,
the olive branch, the star, and
oddly,
these are the very symbols
that the Flavian Caesars
used on their coins.
The final connecting
point between the Flavian
family and Christianity is
that in the fourth century,
Flavius Constantine made
Christianity
the state religion of Rome.
The military achievements of
Caesar's
were important to all Romans.
So certainly, the Flavian
Christians, the group
that the Roman Catholic
Church states were the first
saints of the religion, would
have known
the identity of the son of
man that Jesus predicted
who would crush Galilee,
encircle Jerusalem with a wall,
and raze the temple was Titus
Flavius.
- [Voiceover] So it seems
if a person knows how
to uncover them, there
are actually many clues
pointing to the Flavian
origin of Christianity,
and perhaps the most intriguing
one that Joseph Atwill
uncovered is a secret
code the Flavians used
in their documents,
which enabled him to make
his startling discovery.
- So the Romans had the Jew's
scripture
locked up inside their imperial
court and they studied it.
And what they discovered
was that there was a unique
literary code hidden in the
text.
- [Voiceover] This hidden
code, which was common
in Jewish scripture, was used
by the Flavian literary team
to place passages into
the gospels that had to be
deciphered to be understood.
This hidden literary technique
is known as typology.
- Typology is used throughout
the ancient Hebraic literature
and it's a genre that is
really no longer understood
or used today, but simply
put, typology is using
events from the past to provide
form and context for subsequent
ones.
- What we're talking about
is stereotypic, stereotypic.
In other words, there's
an idolized prototype
which shows certain
characteristics
are performed in certain ways.
- For instance, one of the
things they do
is they take an old story and
they retell it in a new form,
and they superimpose
contemporary history
upon old stories, and they
create these multi-layered text.
- In Hebraic typology, texts
were designed
to be read in comparison to one
another
or inter-textually and in doing
so,
a meaning that would not be
visible
in the surface narration would
become
apparent to someone who
understood the typologic
connection between the stories.
Hebraic typology connects
prophets.
Events from the life of one
prophet
are placed into the life
of a subsequent prophet,
and this shows that
there is a divine pattern
established by God, connecting
his prophets to one another.
- [Voiceover] The gospels
actually show how we can
decipher for ourselves this
hidden code or typology
that was used to create the
Jesus story.
(dramatic music)
- [Joseph] At the very
beginning of the gospels,
there is a primer of this
typology.
What the author of Matthew has
done is
take events from the Old
Testament
and place them into the life of
Jesus.
These events occur in the same
sequence
in the story of Jesus as they
occur in the Old Testament.
- [Voiceover] Numerous
bible scholars had already
identified the following
parallels.
- [Joseph] Both stories have
a patriarch named Joseph
who goes from Israel to Egypt.
A ruler who massacres innocent
boys.
A divine character who states
that,
"All the men are dead
who sought your life."
And then a return from Egypt to
Israel.
This is followed by events which
have passing through water.
In the Old Testament, the
Israelites
pass through the Red Sea.
In Matthew, Jesus is given a
baptism
in which he passes through
water.
We then travel into the
wilderness.
The Israelites are in the
wilderness for 40 years.
Jesus goes into the
wilderness for 40 days.
Finally, we have the three
temptations.
In the Old Testament, we
have the temptation by bread,
the statement, "Do not tempt
God."
And the commandment to worship
only God.
These appear again in Matthew
where Jesus
is tempted by bread, tells
the Devil, "Do not tempt God."
And instructs him to worship
only God.
Therefore, when you
compare the life of Jesus
with the life of Moses, you see
a linkage
that shows that the
character in the gospels was
divinely connected to the
character in the Old Testament.
The life of the first
savior of Israel, Moses,
foresaw the life of
Jesus, who's now claiming
to be the next savior of Israel.
- [Voiceover] To understand
the rest of the Jesus story,
his adult ministry, we simply
need to know that the same
system of parallel names,
locations, and concepts
occurring in the same sequence
was used
to connect Jesus and the gospels
to
Titus and the works of Josephus.
Our scholars explain this gospel
typology
in the following three examples.
- Jesus comes to the sea of
Gallilee
at the beginning of his
ministry.
He gathers his disciples to him
and he says, "Do not be afraid.
"Follow me, and become fishers
of men."
In the gospel of Luke, Jesus
actually says catchers of men.
Titus comes to the same
location, to the sea of Galilee.
He gathers his troops,
his disciples together
and he says, "Don't be afraid."
And then he leads them.
They follow him, and they
attack a group of Jewish rebels.
They sink the Jews' boats.
The Jews attempt to swim
to safety and the Romans
use their spears to catch them.
They become fishers of men.
- The match isn't exact,
but we should never expect it to
be exact.
It's simply a type
which is repeated across
the whole of the New Testament.
(foreboding music)
- Jesus is constantly dealing
with devils.
Josephus also deals with
devils, but Josephus
defines who these devils are.
He states that the devils
are those individuals
who have a rebellious spirit
and rebel against Rome.
At Gadara, Jesus encounters
one man who has a legion
of demons inside his mind.
They, then, are driven out by
Jesus.
They infect a heard of swine and
this herd
rushes wildly into the water.
This is a parallel to
Titus's battle at Gadara
where one individual
infects an entire legion
of Jews with his demonic spirit
and then
that group, in turn, infects
another group
and this combined group
is driven by the Romans into the
sea.
- What's being suggested
here is that this story
that you find in the
gospels is, in some ways,
sort of like a grim parallel
about that military event.
It's sort of like a bit
tongue and cheek, I think.
The Romans has a vicious
sense of humor like this,
a very black sense of humor.
In a medieval text that I
studied,
which is called the Gospel
of Barnabas, when you read
that story, the way
it's presented is in an
unsophisticated form.
That is to say it's sort of been
decoded
in some ways, and it becomes
clear
what we're talking about
here are Jewish rebels
chased into the sea and
they drown into the sea.
In the gospels, these
are presented as pigs.
This is a, once again, a very
dark,
black, sort of, Roman sense of
humor.
Some of this literature really
needs to be understood like
that.
- In Josephus's biography, he
describes
when he was in the
entourage of Titus during
the closing stages of
the siege of Jerusalem,
he chanced upon three of
his friends who were being
crucified, and he pleaded with
Titus
for their release, and
Titus gave that permission
and the three figures were
removed from the cross.
Two of them died, and one
revived.
Now, if you're looking
for a stereotypic example
of how some idea was floated
into the mind of someone
writing the gospels, that
is a pretty clear example.
It's certainly a strange
occurrence that we find
such an incident that we
find in the work of Josephus
when it shows up in such a
dramatic form in the gospels.
- [Joseph] In the gospels,
Joseph of Arimathea asked
the Roman commander to take
Jesus down from the cross.
In Josephus's history, Joseph
Bar Mathias
asked the Roman commander to
take someone down from the
cross.
Arimathea is a pun on Josephus's
last name, Bar Mathias.
- When you read our
sources really carefully,
and you have to do it
really, really carefully
because they didn't spell it out
for us.
It's effectively very
well-hidden.
We have to understand that our
literature,
a lot of our literature
is essentially propaganda.
The Romans are not
writing objective history,
and all of our literature has
been through Roman filters.
Perhaps that's the significance
of the Dead Sea scrolls
that this literature that
hasn't been through the Roman
filters.
- It's important to
realize that Josephus wrote
in an era when allegory
was regarded as a science.
Educated readers were expected
to be able
to see another meaning in
religious texts
than the one that appeared
in the surface narration.
- We're dealing with Roman
literature on the one hand
and Jewish literature on the
other,
and it has to be said that in
both cases,
they're much more sophisticated,
much more multi-layered
and allusive and much trickier
than modern readers suspect.
No, it's not a very simple
literature.
It's very, very complex
allegorical literature
that indulges into the literary
games
that the Romans played.
The more you understand
about Roman literature
in this period and then
you place the gospels
and other Christian literature
in that same mirror,
you can start to see the games
that are being played in that
literature.
- Now these parallels have
been seen by other scholars,
but what they failed to
notice is that they occur
in the same sequence, and
thereby,
they create a typologic pattern.
- The Flavian thesis, it's
trying to read these texts
in context because in any given
text,
you've got the text in the first
instance,
and then you've got the
context, the environment
in which it happens, and of
course, in all of these texts,
also, you've got a subtext.
So you've got text, context and
subtext,
and you have to be able to
read all of those things
and unfortunately, many
religious people
who are coming out of
seminaries, who are coming out
of religious colleges, they're
just not
being trained in this
sort of level of reading.
They're, instead, just
being trained to just read
on one level, which is a literal
level,
and I think that that's very
unfortunate
and that really needs to be
challenged.
- [Voiceover] By studying
the multiple layers
in these ancient texts in
the original Greek language,
Joseph Atwill was able to
discover not just a handfu0l,
but over 40 typological
parallels between
the gospels and the works of
Josephus,
which show that the ministry
of Jesus Christ followed
an exact sequence the military
campaign of Titus Flavius
through parallel names,
locations, and concepts.
- Once I understood the
system that the Flavians
were using to link Jesus and
Titus,
I was able to discover
dozens of these parallels
between Jesus and Titus,
and what was amazing
is that they occurred
in the same sequence.
And this simply proves
that this was deliberate,
that these unusual
parallels had been created
by the Flavians as a signature.
It is their way of telling
posterity that
they authored the gospels.
These parallels are the Flavian
signature of the gospels.
(triumphant music)
Both Jesus and Titus began their
campaigns at the Sea of Galilee
and then go into the Galilean
countryside
followed by a journey to
Jerusalem.
Once they reach the city's
outskirts,
they pause for a period before
they enter.
Finally, they leave the city
where their campaigns come to an
end.
To catalog the many
parallels, I gave each one
a convenient name that
related to the concept
in that particular parallel set.
Starting at Galilee, each
of these are episodes
that occurred both in the
gospel stories of Jesus
and in the history of
Titus's military campaign.
(upbeat music)
Both Jesus and Titus
journeyed to Jerusalem,
each sending messengers ahead to
meet him
when he gets to the city.
When the Romans get to
Jerusalem,
they notice that the Jewish
factions are fighting
against themselves.
At this point in the gospels,
Jesus talks about a house
divided
against itself cannot stand.
Then Josephus wrote that
in preparation for battle,
Titus ordered all of the fruit
trees
between the Roman camp
and the walls of Jerusalem cut
down.
At this point in the
gospels, Jesus states that
if a fruit tree does not
bear fruit tree, cut it down.
Titus goes around the walls of
Jerusalem
looking for the best
place to construct a tower
from which they can launch their
attack.
At this point in the gospels,
Jesus asks,
"Which one of you who is
going to build a tower
"doesn't first sit down
and think about the cost?"
At this point in the
history, Titus sends Josephus
to ask the Jews what terms
they will accept for peace.
In the gospels, Jesus
describes a king who sends
a delegation to ask for terms of
peace.
Both Jesus and Titus at
this point have triumphant
entrances into Jerusalem,
during which amazingly,
stones are said to cry out.
Each, then, drives a den of
thieves
out from the area from
in front of the temple.
This is followed by Titus
encircling Jerusalem
with a wall, and Jesus
predicting that
Jerusalem will be encircled with
a wall.
Because of the walls,
starvation sets into Jerusalem.
Josephus wrote that a woman
named Mary
who called her son a myth for
the world
slayed him, ate him,
thereby turning him into
a human Passover lamb.
In the gospels, we now
have the Last Supper.
Jesus tells his disciples,
"Take, eat.
"This is my body.
"This is my blood."
Therefore, turning him
into a human Passover lamb.
Here, then, is the
Flavian signature of their
authorship of the gospels.
- You can see the fingerprints
that
they've left their fingerprints
all over these texts.
You can start to, as it
were, decode these texts
and start to arrive at some
really startling conclusions
about how early Christianity
first arose.
- [Voiceover] Our scholars have
shown
that the gospels were not the
product of primitive Jewish
fisherman, rather they are a
sophisticated literary work
combining religious ideas of the
day
with Roman political
perspective and power.
Joseph Atwill's research reveals
that
reading the works of Josephus
concurrently
with the New Testament
shows that the events
of Jesus's life were not
historical,
but rather all of them are
dependent
on the events of the military
campaign of Titus Flavius.
Jesus Christ was an allegory
for the Roman Caesar Titus,
the Messiah of the Roman
Empire, the Roman son
of a god that Christianity
was set up to worship.
- I certainly don't want to
undermine
the positive things in
Christianity.
I'm happy to admit that
there are positive things
in Christianity and in
other religions as well.
What's an issue here are the
historical claims of these
religions.
- [Voiceover] Traditionally,
religious dogma
has forbidden the examination
of historical discoveries
or the inclusion of
certain scientific findings
in their teachings, asking
their followers instead
to blindly believe as they say,
not as the objective facts may
show.
- Even if a time, perhaps it's a
new
intellectual renaissance which
is
getting fed up with many of the
structures
that we live with, which is
recognizing
major frauds at the
hearts of our financial
market and the heart of our
industry
and the plug is being pulled on
them.
And my view is that we
have yet another fraud,
the biggest of them
all, and it's the fraud
of the heart of Christianity.
And it is a time for the
whistleblowers to come out
and to make this information
available
not just to scholars in academic
journals,
but to have it widely available
to anybody who wants to know.
- [Voiceover] It's helpful to
hear
a wide diversity of
voices in order for people
to arrive at their own
conclusions,
and the theories brought
forth by our scholars
are a part of that diversity.
- When they hear that the
Jesus story is a myth,
people feel like you're
taking something away,
but you're really not.
You push people and you
go, "Why do you believe
"in the historical Jesus?"
Often people will go,
"Well, you know, the Bible or
something."
But when you go, "Well,
have you studied it
"as a historical document?
"Have you looked at the
evidence?"
They'll go, "Well, no, I
haven't."
So that's not the real reason.
The real reason, when you push
people is,
"Well, I have a relationship
with Jesus.
"I have a personal
relationship with Jesus,
"and that's what I don't want to
lose."
And that's a really good reason
a Gnostic,
and really bad reason
to be a Literatalist.
- [Voiceover] The Gnostics, as
well as
pre-Christian pagan mystery
schools
believed that the myth of
the dying and resurrecting
god man was an allegory to
be used for personal growth,
to die to their lower nature
and arise to their higher
nature.
The Literalists took control
of the original myths
and shaped it so it would take
the power
away from the individual
and place it into a central
authority.
Rediscovering the original
myths gives people
the freedom to choose the
beliefs that truly served them.
- Okay, some Christians have
developed
their personal faith to the
extent that
that Christ is this energy or
force of power within them.
This is how they have
interpreted the story now.
The story has become, again,
what it actually began as, an
allegory.
I have no issue with the Christ
within.
I have an issue with the church
militant.
What threatens humanity
is organized, regimentized
religion on the march, taken so
seriously
that you will act out its worst
presets.
- [Voiceover] If we
examine all the religions
of the world, we find that
there is a common threat
that connects all faiths and all
people,
and it is from this
connection that we can make
the choices that have now become
so critical to our future.
- I like to focus on the
origins of religious ideas
and it turns out that they're
very unifying underneath
all of the divisiveness
that we see on the surface
that would be extremely
helpful for all of humanity
to realize that there
is this underlying unity
and those origins are
basically nature worship:
the study of the sun, the
moon, the stars, the planets.
This is all what humanity
has been looking at,
of course, with great awe and
reverence
for thousands of years and
it's extremely important,
I think, for us, to get
back to those roots.
The destruction of the
planet is also directly
tied to religious ideas.
This can help to restore
balance to the planet,
in this very, very
profoundly significant way.
- [Voiceover] The very
survival of humanity
depends on the viewing
history from a new perspective
so that we can be clearer
on the historical facts
and still honor the myths that
offer us the greatest wisdom.
- It's what the myth, what the
poetry says
that matters, not what actually
happened.
So each new generation, whatever
you say,
is going to hear the myth and
that's what is true for them.
And what follows is the
actual history and it's much
too complex for the average
person to ever
put their head around.
- [Voiceover] Though the
actual history is complex,
and we may never know
all of the facts about
what happened 2,000 years ago,
the voices of our
scholars are contributing
to an ever-widening
dialogue and the growing
paradigm shift being
witnessed all around the world
today that can lead to a more
empowered
and enlightened humanity
tomorrow.
- This is really
important for our culture,
to understand where
Christianity came from,
and this is direct evidence.
You can actually walk this path
and come to this conclusion.
You can know that Christianity
was an invention of the Romans.
It was done to pacify their
subjects,
and this is important because it
gives us
a different way of
understanding government,
how government operates, the
tools that government uses,
the purpose that government has
for the
various propaganda apparatus.
Evangelical Christians are
getting away
with debunking facts as mere
theories.
Even subjects like evolution,
but they provide no
evidence for their position
other than to simply cite
religious dogma,
and if you look at the
influence that dogma
is having in the media today,
you can easily see it is
increasing.
I would like to challenge these
extremists
to consider the possibility
that my findings are correct.
Though their is much good in
Christianity,
we have to understand how rulers
have used it to control us,
and how they are still using
it to control us today.
I hope citizens will be more
skeptical
when they hear an authority
figure
using faith to interpret laws or
a belief
in Armageddon to create
governmental policies.
The Flavians encoded a secret
message into the gospels,
which we can now
understand in a new light.
"You shall know the truth and
the truth shall set you free."
(triumphant music)
(upbeat music)